blog: Fixing a remote execution vulnerability in sbt (#1942)
scala/scala-lang: blog/_posts/2026-08-07-sbt-remote-tcp-advisory.md

---
layout: blog-detail
post-type: blog
by: Anatolii Kmetiuk (Scala Center) and Eugene Yokota
title: "Fixing a remote execution vulnerability in sbt"
---

> This post covers work done under the [Sovereign Tech Fund investment](https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2026/01/27/sta-invests-in-scala.html) umbrella: [sbt 2 Stable Release and Maintenance](https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/sbt-2-production-ready-roadmap/7351). The work is coordinated by the [Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/).

> As part of our ongoing work on the sbt 2 release, we’ve been reviewing bug reports and pull requests.

Reviewer: This feels strange — it's not the main subject of the blog post, but it's just sort of sitting here at the top?

Author: Yea this existed before I added tldr section and now it doesn't connect.

Author: Addressed in 7d1a3f54730f67b3c29d1658a797b16b96dfac88

## TL;DR

> We recommend removing the `serverConnectionType` setting (not set by default), or upgrading to sbt 1.12.15 / sbt 2.0.6 or later by putting the following in `project/build.properties`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only builds that explicitly set `serverConnectionType` are affected. You can remove the setting from your build, or upgrade to sbt 1.12.15 / sbt 2.0.6 or later by putting the following in `project/build.properties`:
```

```scala
sbt.version=1.12.15
```

> Note that installing a new runner does not affect the sbt version used for the build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that installing a new `sbt` command does not affect the sbt version used by each individual build.
```

## The vulnerability

> sbt team received a security report [GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/security/advisories/GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v) from [Arpit Jain](https://github.com/arpitjain099) that an attacker is able to execute arbitrary code remotely via the sbt server when the `serverConnectionType` is set to `ConnectionType.Tcp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sbt team received a security report [GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/security/advisories/GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v) from [Arpit Jain](https://github.com/arpitjain099) that an attacker is able to execute arbitrary code remotely via the sbt server when the `serverConnectionType` is set to `ConnectionType.Tcp`.
```

> sbt team received a security report [GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/security/advisories/GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v) from [Arpit Jain](https://github.com/arpitjain099) that an attacker is able to execute arbitrary code remotely via the sbt server when the `serverConnectionType` is set to `ConnectionType.Tcp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sbt team received a security report [GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/security/advisories/GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v) from [Arpit Jain](https://github.com/arpitjain099) that an attacker is able to execute arbitrary code remotely via the sbt server when the `serverConnectionType` is set to `ConnectionType.Tcp`.
```

> By default, sbt uses UNIX domain socket on Linux and macOS, and named pipes on Windows, but this can be changed to TCP using the following setting:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, sbt uses UNIX domain sockets on Linux and macOS, and named pipes on Windows, but this can be changed to TCP using the following setting:
```

```scala
Global / serverConnectionType := ConnectionType.Tcp
```

This will use a TCP port that can be calculated deterministically from the working directory, e.g. 5001, for the sbt server communication. An attacker can then craft a JSON-RPC message, masquerading as an sbt client.

In a normal sequence, using TCP would go through a token authentication so only the local user can use the sbt server; however, there were several endpoints that were not protected by the access control, which allowed improper escalation. This is a form of [CWE-425: Direct Request](https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/425.html). The vulnerability has existed since sbt 1.1.0 and affects both the sbt 1.x and sbt 2.x series.

## The fix

The primary fix was to make sure all LSP-like endpoints are protected behind authorization when using TCP. The fix is available in sbt 1.12.15 and 2.0.6. The remediation was implemented by Eugene and Anatolii using GitHub's private fork feature. The full advisory is available as [GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/security/advisories/GHSA-m2pw-22cj-jq4v).

> We recommend removing the `serverConnectionType` setting, or upgrading to a patched version sbt 1.12.15 / sbt 2.0.6 or later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend removing the `serverConnectionType` setting from your build, or upgrading to a patched version sbt 1.12.15 / sbt 2.0.6 or later.
```

## AI tooling

When Claude Mythos 5 was announced, it was widely reported that the LLM had reached the ability to discover new vulnerabilities in software. Subsequent availability of Claude Fable 5 and competing models have put the idea to the test. In the security report, the reporter has noted that he used AI assistance for the code audit and for drafting this report, and including detailed tracing of functions across multiple source files.

> When we prompted Claude Code to discover vulnerabilities, it downgraded to Opus 5, but was able to discovered the same remote execution bug.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we prompted Claude Code to discover vulnerabilities, it downgraded to Opus 5, but was able to discover the same remote execution bug.
```

Reviewer: The "it downgraded to Opus 5" part is mysterious to me. Why would it downgrade? What is the upshot for the reader here?

Author: Claude has a safe guard mechanism to prevent general public from using it to discover exploits, and instead of outright stopping it downgrades the model to a weaker, previous generation of the model, like Opus 5. In this case, Opus 5 was still able to find the exploit, somewhat proving that someone with an LLM can discover vulnerabilities with low efforts.

Author: I've expanded it in 2d2df04a0b66311ae517ed53ec5e8d0d098212ed as follows:

> When we prompted Claude Fable 5 to discover vulnerabilities, it downgraded itself to a previous model as a safeguard, but discovered the same remote execution bug nonetheless. We might actually be in the age of discovery-cable LLMs.
